The Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf (PTI) has said that the party chief Imran Khan will be sworn in as the prime minister of Pakistan before August 14 -- the country's Independence Day. Some concerns have been raised about the possibility of Imran Khan delivering his first public speech as the prime minister of Pakistan on Independence Day. The reason is an elaborate post-elections procedure that has to be followed under the law to ensure accountability of the elected legislators and transparency of the process.

Imran Khan's PTI won 116 of the directly contested 272 seats in the elections held on July 25, falling 21 short of the halfway mark. Under the existing provisions, the elected candidates have to furnish details of the expenditure incurred during the campaign. This process has to be completed within 10 days of the conduct of elections. This means, the elected legislators are required to submit their expenditure details to the Election Commission of Pakistan (ECP) by August 4.

Once the winning candidates submit the expenditure details, the ECP will release the official list of the Members of National Assembly (MNAs). This list is expected on August 5.

The next step involves declaration by all Independent legislators to declare which party they will join or align with. The declarations have to be furnished to the ECP within three days of the official release of the list of MNAs - that is, by August 8.

The declarations by Independent winning candidates are necessary to decide the number of women and minority MNAs to be allocated to respective parties. Pakistan has a quota of 60 women MNAs and 10 minority MNAs. Their number to respective parties is decided on the principle of proportional representation.

Punjab has the highest quota with 33 women MNAs followed by 14 women MNAs from Sind, 9 from Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and 4 from Balochistan. A party gets one woman MNA for each 4.5 seats in the National Assembly. The final shape of National Assembly is likely to be ready by August 9.